What punishment awaits us if it be discovered we know not, for no such crime has come in the memory of men and there are no laws to provide for it.
 The laws say that none among men may be alone, ever and at any time, for this is the great transgression and the root of all evil. Over the portals of the Palace of the World Council, there are words cut in the marble, which we repeat to ourselves whenever we are tempted: 
 And these words are the truth, for they are written on the Palace of the World Council, and the World Council is the body of all truth. They whisper many strange things, of the towers which rose to the sky, in those Unmentionable Times, and of the wagons which moved without horses, and of the lights which burned without flame. And those times passed away, when men saw the Great Truth which is this: that all men are one and that there is no will save the will of all men together.
 Before we removed our garments, we stood in the great sleeping hall, and we raised our right arms, and we said all together with the three Teachers at the head:
 For the Council of Vocations knows in its great wisdom where you are needed by your brother men, better than you can know it in your unworthy little minds. But the Council of Scholars has said that there are no mysteries, and the Council of Scholars knows all things. And in the darkness, in the secret hour, when we awoke in the night and there were no brothers around us, but only their shapes in the beds and their snores, we closed our eyes, and we held our lips shut, and we stopped our breath, that no shudder might let our brothers see or hear or guess, and we thought that we wished to be sent to the Home of the Scholars when our time would come.
 And there they study for many years, so that they may become candidates and be elected to the City Council and the State Council and the World Council—by a free and general vote of all men. The candles are lit, and the Councils of the different Homes stand in a pulpit, and they speak to us of our duties and of our brother men. Then visiting Leaders mount the pulpit and they read to us the speeches which were made in the City Council that day, for the City Council represents all men and all men must know. And also they were not liked because they took pieces of coal and they drew pictures upon the walls, and they were pictures which made men laugh. No men known to us could have built this place, nor the men known to our brothers who lived before us, and yet it was built by men. For men are forbidden to take notice of women, and women are forbidden to take notice of men. And we take no heed of the law which says that men may not think of women, save at the Time of Mating. This is the time each spring when all the men older than twenty and all the women older than eighteen are sent for one night to the City Palace of Mating. And each of the men have one of the women assigned to them by the Council of Eugenics. Children are born each winter, but women never see their children and children never know their parents. The other women were far off in the field, when we stopped at the hedge by the side of the road. Only their eyes grew wider, and there was triumph in their eyes, and it was not triumph over us, but over things we could not guess.
 Your eyes,” they said, “are not like the eyes of any among men.” Still, without reason, as we stood there by the hedge, we felt our lips drawn tight with hatred, a sudden hatred for all our brother men. We think that in the wisdom of women the Golden One had understood more than we can understand.
 For, as it has been explained to us, men are free and the earth belongs to them; and all things on earth belong to all men; and the will of all men together is good for all; and so all men must be happy.
 Yet as we stand at night in the great hall, removing our garments for sleep, we look upon our brothers and we wonder. Men never enter the Uncharted Forest, for there is no power to explore it and no path to lead among its ancient trees which stand as guards of fearful secrets. It is whispered that once or twice in a hundred years, one among the men of the City escape alone and run to the Uncharted Forest, without call or reason. And as we look upon the Uncharted Forest far in the night, we think of the secrets of the Unmentionable Times. There is some word, one single word which is not in the language of men, but which had been. They find it upon scraps of old manuscripts or cut into the fragments of ancient stones. And we stood in the great square with all the children and all the men of the City, sent to behold the burning. And it seemed as if these eyes were trying to tell us something through the flames, to send into our eyes some word without sound. The secrets of this earth are not for all men to see, but only for those who will seek them. We put a piece of copper and a piece of zinc into a jar of brine, we touched a wire to them, and there, under our fingers, was a miracle which had never occurred before, a new miracle and a new power.
 For it defies all the laws known to men. It makes the needle move and turn on the compass which we stole from the Home of the Scholars; but we had been taught, when still a child, that the loadstone points to the north and that this is a law which nothing can change; yet our new power defies all laws. We found that it causes lightning, and never have men known what causes lightning. We do not understand them, but we think that the men of the Unmentionable Times had known our power of the sky, and these things had some relation to it. We forget all men, all laws and all things save our metals and our wires. Never have men said this to women.
 Tonight, after more days and trials than we can count, we finished building a strange thing, from the remains of the Unmentionable Times, a box of glass, devised to give forth the power of the sky of greater strength than we had ever achieved before. We could not see our body nor feel it, and in that moment nothing existed save our two hands over a wire glowing in a black abyss.
 We need all our time, we need the work rooms of the Home of the Scholars, we want the help of our brother Scholars and their wisdom joined to ours. In a month, the World Council of Scholars is to meet in our City. They will explain it to the Council of Vocations, and we shall be assigned to the Home of the Scholars. For should any men save the Scholars learn of our secret, they would not understand it, nor would they believe us. When the Council of the Home questioned us, we looked upon the faces of the Council, but there was no curiosity in those faces, and no anger, and no mercy. Give no thought to us, for we are nothing, but listen to our words, for we bring you a gift such as had never been brought to men. “Many men in the Homes of the Scholars have had strange new ideas in the past,” said Solidarity 8-1164, “but when the majority of their brother Scholars voted against them, they abandoned their ideas, as all men must.” “Should it be what they claim of it,” said Harmony 9-2642, “then it would bring ruin to the Department of Candles. “And if this should lighten the toil of men,” said Similarity 5-0306, “then it is a great evil, for men have no cause to exist save in toiling for other men.” We have torn ourselves from the truth which is our brother men, and there is no road back for us, and no redemption.
 And that night we knew that to hold the body of women in our arms is neither ugly nor shameful, but the one ecstasy granted to the race of men.
 The trees had protected it from time and weather, and from men who have less pity than time and weather. They were not soft and rolled, they had hard shells of cloth and leather; and the letters on their pages were so small and so even that we wondered at the men who had such handwriting. This word must never be placed first within man’s soul, else it becomes a monster, the root of all the evils on earth, the root of man’s torture by men, and of an unspeakable lie.
 And now I see the face of god, and I raise this god over the earth, this god whom men have sought since men came into being, this god who will grant them joy and peace and pride.
 He took the light of the gods and he brought it to men, and he taught men to be gods. Through the years ahead, I shall rebuild the achievements of the past, and open the way to carry them further, the achievements which are open to me, but closed forever to my brothers, for their minds are shackled to the weakest and dullest ones among them.
 I shall call to me all the men and the women whose spirit has not been killed within them and who suffer under the yoke of their brothers. He declared to all his brothers that a man has rights which neither god nor king nor other men can take away from him, no matter what their number, for his is the right of man, and there is no right on earth above this right. When men accepted that worship, the structure of centuries collapsed about them, the structure whose every beam had come from the thought of some one man, each in his day down the ages, from the depth of some one spirit, such spirit as existed but for its own sake. Thus did men—men with nothing to offer save their great number—lost the steel towers, the flying ships, the power wires, all the things they had not created and could never keep. Perhaps, later, some men had been born with the mind and the courage to recover these things which were lost; perhaps these men came before the Councils of Scholars. But I still wonder how it was possible, in those graceless years of transition, long ago, that men did not see whither they were going, and went on, in blindness and cowardice, to their fate.