Their agreement with him was made before they left the old country, through a cousin of his, who was also a relative of Mrs. Shimerda. She made Mrs. Shimerda understand the friendly intention of our visit, and the Bohemian woman handled the loaves of bread and even smelled them, and examined the pies with lively curiosity, exclaiming, ‘Much good, much thank!’--and again she wrung grandmother’s hand.
 We went with Mr. Shimerda back to the dugout, where grandmother was waiting for me. He placed this book in my grandmother’s hands, looked at her entreatingly, and said, with an earnestness which I shall never forget, ‘Te-e-ach, te-e-ach my Antonia!’
 At a distance, on his wagon, he looked like an old man; his hair and beard were of such a pale flaxen colour that they seemed white in the sun. I picked up the gun he had dropped; a queer piece from the old country, short and heavy, with a stag’s head on the cock. The old man’s smile, as he listened, was so full of sadness, of pity for things, that I never afterward forgot it. Peter told his troubles to Mr. Shimerda: he was unable to meet a note which fell due on the first of November; had to pay an exorbitant bonus on renewing it, and to give a mortgage on his pigs and horses and even his milk cow. When Antonia and her father got into the wagon, I entreated grandmother to let me go with them: I would gladly go without my supper, I would sleep in the Shimerdas’ barn and run home in the morning. Mr. Shimerda and Peter were on the front seat; Antonia and I sat in the straw behind and ate our lunch as we bumped along. When Mr. Shimerda and Krajiek drove up in their wagon to take Peter to the train, they found him with a dripping beard, surrounded by heaps of melon rinds.
 The loss of his two friends had a depressing effect upon old Mr. Shimerda. Grandmother went on talking in her polite Virginia way, not admitting their stark need or her own remissness, until Jake arrived with the hamper, as if in direct answer to Mrs. Shimerda’s reproaches. He wanted us to know that they were not beggars in the old country; he made good wages, and his family were respected there. After I watched Antonia and her mother go over the hill on their miserable horse, carrying our iron pot with them, I turned to grandmother, who had taken up her darning, and said I hoped that snooping old woman wouldn’t come to see us any more.
 ‘Well, ma’m, I found Krajiek’s axe under the manger, and I picks it up and carries it over to the corpse, and I take my oath it just fit the gash in the front of the old man’s face. Presently, as I looked with satisfaction about our comfortable sitting-room, it flashed upon me that if Mr. Shimerda’s soul were lingering about in this world at all, it would be here, in our house, which had been more to his liking than any other in the neighbourhood. I knew it was homesickness that had killed Mr. Shimerda, and I wondered whether his released spirit would not eventually find its way back to his own country. But we believe that Mr. Shimerda’s soul will come to its Creator as well off without a priest. They were all eager for any details about the suicide, and they were greatly concerned as to where Mr. Shimerda would be buried. There was a burying-ground over by the Norwegian church, west of Squaw Creek; perhaps the Norwegians would take Mr. Shimerda in.
 The officers of the Norwegian church, he told us, had held a meeting and decided that the Norwegian graveyard could not extend its hospitality to Mr. Shimerda.
 Although it was perfectly clear that Mr. Shimerda had killed himself, Jake and the coroner thought something ought to be done to Krajiek because he behaved like a guilty man. They talked excitedly about where they should bury Mr. Shimerda; I gathered that the neighbours were all disturbed and shocked about something. It developed that Mrs. Shimerda and Ambrosch wanted the old man buried on the southwest corner of their own land; indeed, under the very stake that marked the corner. Grandfather asked Jelinek whether in the old country there was some superstition to the effect that a suicide must be buried at the cross-roads.
 ‘Mrs. Shimerda is made up her mind,’ he added. Mrs. Shimerda sat crouching by the stove, Antonia was washing dishes. Mrs. Shimerda, sitting on the stump by the stove, kept looking over her shoulder toward the door while the neighbours were arriving. Grandfather and Jelinek came to tell Mrs. Shimerda that it was time to start. Four men carried Mr. Shimerda’s box up the hill; Krajiek slunk along behind them. Mrs. Shimerda caught her by the shoulders and pushed her toward the coffin, but grandmother interfered.
 ‘No, Mrs. Shimerda,’ she said firmly, ‘I won’t stand by and see that child frightened into spasms. At a look from grandfather, Fuchs and Jelinek placed the lid on the box, and began to nail it down over Mr. Shimerda. Jelinek spoke in a persuasive tone to Mrs. Shimerda, and then turned to grandfather.
 In closing, he said we were leaving Mr. Shimerda at ‘Thy judgment seat, which is also Thy mercy seat.’
 Years afterward, when the open-grazing days were over, and the red grass had been ploughed under and under until it had almost disappeared from the prairie; when all the fields were under fence, and the roads no longer ran about like wild things, but followed the surveyed section-lines, Mr. Shimerda’s grave was still there, with a sagging wire fence around it, and an unpainted wooden cross. As grandfather had predicted, Mrs. Shimerda never saw the roads going over his head. Mrs. Shimerda had paid grandfather ten dollars for a milk cow, and was to give him fifteen more as soon as they harvested their first crop.
 I tied my pony and went into the kitchen where Mrs. Shimerda was baking bread, chewing poppy seeds as she worked. As I sat waiting for the hour when Ambrosch and Antonia would return from the fields, I watched Mrs. Shimerda at her work. While the horses drew in the water, and nosed each other, and then drank again, Antonia sat down on the windmill step and rested her head on her hand.
 Mrs. Shimerda asked me to stay for supper. After Ambrosch and Antonia had washed the field dust from their hands and faces at the wash-basin by the kitchen door, we sat down at the oilcloth-covered table. Mrs. Shimerda ladled meal mush out of an iron pot and poured milk on it. Mrs. Shimerda egged them on, chuckling while she gobbled her food.
 Antonia ate so noisily now, like a man, and she yawned often at the table and kept stretching her arms over her head, as if they ached. Whenever I saw her come up the furrow, shouting to her beasts, sunburned, sweaty, her dress open at the neck, and her throat and chest dust-plastered, I used to think of the tone in which poor Mr. Shimerda, who could say so little, yet managed to say so much when he exclaimed, ‘My Antonia!’
 My schoolmates were none of them very interesting, but I somehow felt that, by making comrades of them, I was getting even with Antonia for her indifference. Antonia often quoted his opinions to me, and she let me see that she admired him, while she thought of me only as a little boy. Marek was cleaning out the stable, and Antonia and her mother were making garden, off across the pond in the draw-head. Mrs. Shimerda threw her hands over her head and clutched as if she were going to pull down lightning. On Monday, about an hour after Jake had started, we saw Mrs. Shimerda and her Ambrosch proudly driving by, looking neither to the right nor left. For weeks afterward, whenever Jake and I met Antonia on her way to the post-office, or going along the road with her work-team, she would clap her hands and call to us in a spiteful, crowing voice:
 Ambrosch and Antonia always greeted him respectfully, and he asked them about their affairs and gave them advice as usual. Mrs. Shimerda then drove the second cultivator; she and Antonia worked in the fields all day and did the chores at night. Antonia had gone down to the barn one night to see that all was well before she went to bed, and she noticed that one of the roans was swollen about the middle and stood with its head hanging. ‘If I lose that horse, Mr. Burden,’ Antonia exclaimed, ‘I never stay here till Ambrosch come home! Grandmother thought Antonia needed shoes more than Mr. Shimerda needed prayers, but grandfather said tolerantly, ‘If he can spare six dollars, pinched as he is, it shows he believes what he professes.’
 ‘I think, Emmaline,’ he concluded, ‘I will ask Antonia to come over and help you in the kitchen. When Mrs. Shimerda saw us coming, she ran from her door down into the draw behind the stable, as if she did not want to meet us. Mrs. Shimerda had run to the animal, pulled up the lariat pin, and, when we came upon her, she was trying to hide the cow in an old cave in the bank. Mrs. Shimerda dropped the rope, ran after us, and, crouching down beside grandfather, she took his hand and kissed it. The next Sunday Mrs. Shimerda came over and brought Jake a pair of socks she had knitted. The men were working so hard in the wheatfields that they did not notice the heat--though I was kept busy carrying water for them--and grandmother and Antonia had so much to do in the kitchen that they could not have told whether one day was hotter than another. The men went down to the barn immediately after supper, and when the dishes were washed, Antonia and I climbed up on the slanting roof of the chicken-house to watch the clouds. All through that first spring and summer I kept hoping that Ambrosch would bring Antonia and Yulka to see our new house. Mrs. Steavens, who now lived on our farm, grew as fond of Antonia as we had been, and always brought us news of her. The Harlings were Norwegians, and Mrs. Harling had lived in Christiania until she was ten years old. When Mrs. Harling made garden that spring, we could feel the stir of her undertaking through the willow hedge that separated our place from hers.
 With Charley, who was not interested in business, but was already preparing for Annapolis, Mr. Harling was very indulgent; bought him guns and tools and electric batteries, and never asked what he did with them.
 In winter she wore a sealskin coat and cap, and she and Mr. Harling used to walk home together in the evening, talking about grain-cars and cattle, like two men. One Sunday Mrs. Harling took the long ride out to the Shimerdas’ with Frances. We found Mrs. Harling with Charley and Sally on the front porch, resting after her hard drive. They had liked Antonia from their first glimpse of her; felt they knew exactly what kind of girl she was. When Mrs. Harling told him firmly that she would keep fifty dollars a year for Antonia’s own use, he declared they wanted to take his sister to town and dress her up and make a fool of her. Mrs. Harling gave us a lively account of Ambrosch’s behaviour throughout the interview; how he kept jumping up and putting on his cap as if he were through with the whole business, and how his mother tweaked his coat-tail and prompted him in Bohemian. Mrs. Harling finally agreed to pay three dollars a week for Antonia’s services--good wages in those days--and to keep her in shoes. There had been hot dispute about the shoes, Mrs. Shimerda finally saying persuasively that she would send Mrs. Harling three fat geese every year to ‘make even.’ ‘When she first came to this country, Frances, and had that genteel old man to watch over her, she was as pretty a girl as ever I saw. Things would have been very different with poor Antonia if her father had lived.’
 Antonia had made herself cloth working-slippers out of Mr. Harling’s old coats, and in these she went padding about after Charley, fairly panting with eagerness to please him.
 Mrs. Harling and Antonia invariably took her part. Though we did not realize it then, Mrs. Harling was our audience when we played, and we always looked to her for suggestions. Mr. Harling had a desk in his bedroom, and his own easy-chair by the window, in which no one else ever sat. Mrs. Harling paid no heed to anyone else if he was there. I used to imagine that the ‘nobles’ of whom Antonia was always talking probably looked very much like Christian Harling, wore caped overcoats like his, and just such a glittering diamond upon the little finger. Mrs. Harling and Nina and Antonia made as much noise as a houseful of children, and there was usually somebody at the piano. I soon learned that if I were sent over on an errand and found Mrs. Harling at the piano, I must sit down and wait quietly until she turned to me. When I was walking home with Frances, after we had left Mrs. Harling at her gate, she said simply, ‘You know, of course, about poor Antonia.’
