Once a certain tall soldier developed virtues and went resolutely to wash a shirt. The tall soldier felt called upon to defend the truth of a rumor he himself had introduced. During the early spring he had refrained from adding extensively to the comfort of his environment because he had felt that the army might start on the march at any moment. There was a youthful private who listened with eager ears to the words of the tall soldier and to the varied comments of his comrades. The smoke from the fire at times neglected the clay chimney and wreathed into the room, and this flimsy chimney of clay and sticks made endless threats to set ablaze the whole establishment.
 When he had stood in the doorway with his soldier's clothes on his back, and with the light of excitement and expectancy in his eyes almost defeating the glow of regret for the home bonds, he had seen two tears leaving their trails on his mother's scarred cheeks.
 If so be a time comes when yeh have to be kilt or do a mean thing, why, Henry, don't think of anything 'cept what's right, because there's many a woman has to bear up 'ginst sech things these times, and the Lord 'll take keer of us all.
 The regiment was fed and caressed at station after station until the youth had believed that he must be a hero. He had had the belief that real war was a series of death struggles with small time in between for sleep and meals; but since his regiment had come to the field the army had done little but sit still and try to keep warm.
 Some talked of gray, bewhiskered hordes who were advancing with relentless curses and chewing tobacco with unspeakable valor; tremendous bodies of fierce soldiery who were sweeping along like the Huns. However, he perceived now that it did not greatly matter what kind of soldiers he was going to fight, so long as they fought, which fact no one disputed. After a time the tall soldier slid dexterously through the hole. "Oh, you'll see fighting this time, my boy, what'll be regular out-and-out fighting," added the tall soldier, with the air of a man who is about to exhibit a battle for the benefit of his friends.
 They call the reg'ment 'Fresh fish' and everything; but the boys come of good stock, and most of 'em 'll fight like sin after they oncet git shootin'," he added, with a mighty emphasis on the last four words.
 "Oh, you think you know--" began the loud soldier with scorn.
 The tall soldier, for one, gave him some assurance. This man's serene unconcern dealt him a measure of confidence, for he had known him since childhood, and from his intimate knowledge he did not see how he could be capable of anything that was beyond him, the youth.   He could conceive of men going very insignificantly about the world bearing a load of courage unseen, and although he had known many of his comrades through boyhood, he began to fear that his judgment of them had been blind. As he looked all about him and pondered upon the mystic gloom, he began to believe that at any moment the ominous distance might be aflare, and the rolling crashes of an engagement come to his ears. Presently a horseman with jangling equipment drew rein before the colonel of the regiment. A dark regiment moved before them, and from behind also came the tinkle of equipments on the bodies of marching men.
 When the sunrays at last struck full and mellowingly upon the earth, the youth saw that the landscape was streaked with two long, thin, black columns which disappeared on the brow of a hill in front and rearward vanished in a wood. The tall soldier burst into praises of what he thought to be his powers of perception.
 At nightfall the column broke into regimental pieces, and the fragments went into the fields to camp.   The loud soldier launched then into the subject of the anticipated fight. If the truth was known," he added, more soberly, "THEY'VE licked US about every clip up to now; but this time--this time--we'll lick 'em good!" "How do you know you won't run when the time comes?" asked the youth.
 "No, I ain't," exclaimed the loud soldier indignantly; "and I didn't say I was the bravest man in the world, neither. He went slowly to his tent and stretched himself on a blanket by the side of the snoring tall soldier. It was during this rapid march that the regiment lost many of the marks of a new command.
 And when the men had replied that they formed a regiment and not a brigade, the older soldiers had laughed, and said, "O Gawd!" The hats of a regiment should properly represent the history of headgear for a period of years. The sound of monotonous axe blows rang through the forest, and the insects, nodding upon their perches, crooned like old women. One gray dawn, however, he was kicked in the leg by the tall soldier, and then, before he was entirely awake, he found himself running down a wood road in the midst of men who were panting from the first effects of speed.   The youth thought the damp fog of early morning moved from the rush of a great body of troops. The sun spread disclosing rays, and, one by one, regiments burst into view like armed men just born of the earth.   For a moment he felt in the face of his great trial like a babe, and the flesh over his heart seemed very thin. The youth could see that the soles of his shoes had been worn to the thinness of writing paper, and from a great rent in one the dead foot projected piteously. During the march the ardor which the youth had acquired when out of view of the field rapidly faded to nothing. As he looked the youth gripped his outcry at his throat. During this halt many men in the regiment began erecting tiny hills in front of them. In a short time there was quite a barricade along the regimental fronts. The youth had been taught that a man became another thing in a battle. He wished to return to camp, knowing that this affair was a blue demonstration; or else to go into a battle and discover that he had been a fool in his doubts, and was, in truth, a man of traditional courage. The philosophical tall soldier measured a sandwich of cracker and pork and swallowed it in a nonchalant manner. "Well," cried the youth, still fidgeting, "I'd rather do anything 'most than go tramping 'round the country all day doing no good to nobody and jest tiring ourselves out." He accepted new environment and circumstance with great coolness, eating from his haversack at every opportunity. In the afternoon the regiment went out over the same ground it had taken in the morning.  Regarding death thus out of the corner of his eye, he conceived it to be nothing but rest, and he was filled with a momentary astonishment that he should have made an extraordinary commotion over the mere matter of getting killed. "Eh?" murmured the youth in great astonishment.
 "It's my first and last battle, old boy," continued the loud soldier. He handed the youth a little packet done up in a yellow envelope.
 "Th' general, he ses he is goin' t' take th' hull cammand of th' 304th when we go inteh action, an' then he ses we'll do sech fightin' as never another one reg'ment done." He began to swear so wondrously that a nervous laugh went along the regimental line. A sketch in gray and red dissolved into a moblike body of men who galloped like wild horses.
 Saunders's got crushed!" whispered the man at the youth's elbow. The youth shot a swift glance along the blue ranks of the regiment. The hoofs of his horse often threatened the heads of the running men, but they scampered with singular fortune. Frequently over this tumult could be heard the grim jokes of the critical veterans; but the retreating men apparently were not even conscious of the presence of an audience.
 The battle reflection that shone for an instant in the faces on the mad current made the youth feel that forceful hands from heaven would not have been able to have held him in place if he could have got intelligent control of his legs.
 The sight of this stampede exerted a floodlike force that seemed able to drag sticks and stones and men from the ground. The youth thought of the village street at home before the arrival of the circus parade on a day in the spring. Across the smoke-infested fields came a brown swarm of running men who were giving shrill yells. As he caught sight of them the youth was momentarily startled by a thought that perhaps his gun was not loaded. He stood trying to rally his faltering intellect so that he might recollect the moment when he had loaded, but he could not.
 The youth, turning swiftly to make sure that the rear was unmolested, saw the commander regarding his men in a highly regretful manner, as if he regretted above everything his association with them.
 For some moments he could not flee no more than a little finger can commit a revolution from a hand.
 If he had thought the regiment was about to be annihilated perhaps he could have amputated himself from it. The regiment was like a firework that, once ignited, proceeds superior to circumstances until its blazing vitality fades. Buried in the smoke of many rifles his anger was directed not so much against the men whom he knew were rushing toward him as against the swirling battle phantoms which were choking him, stuffing their smoke robes down his parched throat. Many of the men were making low-toned noises with their mouths, and these subdued cheers, snarls, imprecations, prayers, made a wild, barbaric song that went as an undercurrent of sound, strange and chantlike with the resounding chords of the war march. The rifles, once loaded, were jerked to the shoulder and fired without apparent aim into the smoke or at one of the blurred and shifting forms which upon the field before the regiment had been growing larger and larger like puppets under a magician's hand.
 The lieutenant of the youth's company had encountered a soldier who had fled screaming at the first volley of his comrades. As he listened to the din from the hillside, to a deep pulsating thunder that came from afar to the left, and to the lesser clamors which came from many directions, it occurred to him that they were fighting, too, over there, and over there, and over there. As he gazed around him the youth felt a flash of astonishment at the blue, pure sky and the sun gleamings on the trees and fields. For moments he had been scrutinizing his person in a dazed way as if he had never before seen himself. There were some handshakings and deep speeches with men whose features were familiar, but with whom the youth now felt the bonds of tied hearts. The shells, which had ceased to trouble the regiment for a time, came swirling again, and exploded in the grass or among the leaves of the trees. The level sheets of flame developed great clouds of smoke that tumbled and tossed in the mild wind near the ground for a moment, and then rolled through the ranks as through a gate. Into the youth's eyes there came a look that one can see in the orbs of a jaded horse. The youth turned his head, shaken from his trance by this movement as if the regiment was leaving him behind. He felt vaguely that death must make a first choice of the men who were nearest; the initial morsels for the dragons would be then those who were following him. The face of a youthful rider, who was jerking his frantic horse with an abandon of temper he might display in a placid barnyard, was impressed deeply upon his mind. The cannon with their noses poked slantingly at the ground grunted and grumbled like stout men, brave but with objections to hurry.
 Sometimes the general was surrounded by horsemen and at other times he was quite alone. There was a tattered man, fouled with dust, blood and powder stain from hair to shoes, who trudged quietly at the youth's side. The youth, who had been holding a bitter debate with himself and casting glances of hatred and contempt at the tattered man, here spoke in a hard voice. All the roarers and lashers served to help him to magnify the dangers and horrors of the engagement that he might try to prove to himself that the thing with which men could charge him was in truth a symmetrical act. The column that had butted stoutly at the obstacles in the roadway was barely out of the youth's sight before he saw dark waves of men come sweeping out of the woods and down through the fields. The forest seemed a vast hive of men buzzing about in frantic circles, but the cheery man conducted the youth without mistakes, until at last he began to chuckle with glee and self-satisfaction. " The regiment was standing at order arms at the side of a lane, waiting for the command to march, when suddenly the youth remembered the little packet enwrapped in a faded yellow envelope which the loud young soldier with lugubrious words had intrusted to him. When, in a dream, it occurred to the youth that his rifle was an impotent stick, he lost sense of everything but his hate, his desire to smash into pulp the glittering smile of victory which he could feel upon the faces of his enemies.
 These troops had apparently been going forward with caution, their rifles held in readiness, when the youthful lieutenant had discovered them and their movement had been interrupted by the volley from the blue regiment.   He was waving his free arm in furious circles, the while shrieking mad calls and appeals, urging on those that did not need to be urged, for it seemed that the mob of blue men hurling themselves on the dangerous group of rifles were again grown suddenly wild with an enthusiasm of unselfishness. The youth, in his leapings, saw, as through a mist, a picture of four or five men stretched upon the ground or writhing upon their knees with bowed heads as if they had been stricken by bolts from the sky. When the significance of this movement had impressed itself upon the youth he turned his head and looked over his shoulder toward the trampled and _débris_-strewed ground.